# Data Needs Tuning Too
## What is this?

This is the code repository accompanying the paper *Data Needs Tuning Too: Reassessing Machine Learning Performance Through a Data-Centric Lens*. It can be used to reproduce the experiment and analysis results in the paper.

This is research code, and we do not recommend using it for anything other than its stated purpose.

## Contents

What this code does: (1) We perform experiments consisting in evaluating multiple ML models (run using [AutoGluon](https://github.com/autogluon/autogluon)) and data preparation pipelines (run using our work-in-progress data preparation library), on the many datasets in the [TabArena](https://github.com/autogluon/tabarena) benchmark suite, which are available on [OpenML](https://www.openml.org/search?type=study&study_type=task&id=457&sort=tasks_included), and evaluate them via *k*-fold cross-validation. (2) We then analyze and plot the results.

We provide three ways to reproduce the paper results.
1. Running the **full experiments** and analysis, to reproduce everything (which may require a HPC cluster and a lot of time).
2. Running **just the full results analysis**: we provide the original result files used for the paper in [`output/original/`](output/original/), in order to reproduce the results without running the experiments (skipping the resource-heavy and time-consuming part).
3. Running **smaller-scale experiments** and analysis, to reproduce the whole process, but faster and on a regular PC. Smaller-scale experiments correspond to smaller sets of models, data pipelines and datasets, evaluated via single holdout.

Below is a guide to installing and running the project.

## Requirements

- **Python v3.12**, which can be acquired from the [Python Downloads page](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

- The **uv** package manager, which can be installed using the [uv installation guide](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/). It is also possible to [install Python through uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/install-python/) instead of the above.

- **Hardware**: The full experiments require a GPU, and may require a HPC cluster to run in reasonable time. The smaller-scale experiments can be run on a regular PC.

    In our case, running the full experiments via a split into 2 CPU and 1 GPU experiments (i.e., sets of models trained on CPU or GPU) in parallel took upwards of 10 hours on the following hardware: *64 AMD EPYC Genoa CPUs, 384 GB RAM* for CPU experiments, and *32 AMD EPYC Genoa CPUs, 1 NVidia L40S, 768 GB RAM* for GPU experiments.

- **OS**: Our experiments were run on a Linux system, and we have not been able to test them on a different OS.

## Installation

The project can be installed using the following commands from the command line.

First, clone this Git repo using:
```
git clone git@github.com:sasa-ml/kdd26-prep-analysis.git
```
or
```
git clone https://github.com/sasa-ml/kdd26-prep-analysis.git
```
or download the project manually.

Next, from the project root directory (`kdd26-prep-analysis/`), install the project using uv:
```
uv sync
uv pip install -e .
```

## Running experiments
### 1. Full experiments

To run the CPU experiments:
```
uv run prep_analysis/run_scripts/run_experiment_cpu.py 
```

To run the GPU experiments:
```
uv run prep_analysis/run_scripts/run_experiment_gpu.py 
```

Once experiments are completed, run the analysis:
```
uv run prep_analysis/run_scripts/run_analysis_experiment.py 
```

### 2. Just the analysis for full experiments

To run the analysis on the original result files:
```
uv run prep_analysis/run_scripts/run_analysis_original.py 
```

### 3. Smaller-scale experiments

To run smaller-scale experiments:
```
uv run prep_analysis/run_scripts/run_experiment_small.py 
```
Once completed, run the analysis:
```
uv run prep_analysis/run_scripts/run_analysis_small.py 
```

## Results

Experiment and analysis results are saved in their corresponding directories in `output/`. The exact paths are printed in the console after each script finishes running.

Results consist in:
- Result log files from experiment runs.
- Plot image files generated by the analysis.
- A few numeric analysis results printed in the console.
